JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff. Gwen Ifill is
away. On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Five people were shot in
Minneapolis protesting a police
shooting. This comes as a
Chicago officer is charged with
murder for firing 16 times at a
black teen last year. Then,
Turkey shoots down a Russian
warplane that was on the
Syrian-Turkey border,
complicating talks between
President Obama and French
President Hollande over strategy
against ISIS. And how pesticides
are killing bee colonies.
CHRISTIAN KRUPKE, Purdue
University: We collected some of
those bees and analyzed them,
and found neonicotinoids on them
and in them, so there is an
intersection between planting
these crops and killing foraging
honey bees. JUDY WOODRUFF: All
that and more on tonight's "PBS
NewsHour." (BREAK) JUDY
WOODRUFF: There is breaking news
out of Chicago tonight. The
mayor and the chief of police
are holding a press conference
at this hour about the shooting
of 17-year-old Laquan McDonald.
They're expected to release a
video of the shooting. The
teenager was fatally shot last
year by police officer Jason Van
Dyke, who emptied all 16 rounds
of his firearm. Earlier today,
Van Dyke was charged with
first-degree murder. Tonight,
the Chicago Police Department
has ordered most of the police
force into uniform in
anticipation of possible
protests. The family of the
victim has urged people to stay
calm. We will have more on this
story later in the program. The
air war over Syria saw a
long-feared escalation today, as
a Russian warplane was shot down
by the Turks in disputed
circumstances, while, in
Washington, President Obama
pledged American solidarity to
French President Hollande, as
the two leaders discussed
efforts to unite a global
coalition to fight the Islamic
State 10 days after the attacks
in Paris. This fiery streak
hurtling earthward is a Russian
Sukhoi fighter jet, shot down by
Turkish warplanes. Turkey said
the jet entered its airspace and
ignored multiple calls to leave.
But Russia rejected those
claims, and said the jet was
operating over Syrian airspace
amid its bombing campaign. The
incident occurred near Turkey's
southernmost border. Rebel
groups on the ground said the
plane crashed close to the
Syrian town of Yamadi. Russia's
military said that both pilots
ejected, and confirmed one was
killed. The fate of the second
pilot remained unclear. Russian
officials said he was still
missing, but a commander of a
rebel group in Syria said they
killed both pilots. MAN (through
translator): Our comrades opened
fire into the air. We all did.
They died in the air. JUDY
WOODRUFF: A Russian soldier
aboard a helicopter was also
killed during a
search-and-rescue operation. One
Russian chopper was brought down
by Syrian rebel fire. This video
apparently shows its
destruction, using an anti-tank
missile supplied to some Syrian
rebel groups by the United
States. The shoot-down led to
immediate and harsh words.
Russian President Vladimir Putin
warned of serious consequences
in denouncing the Turks.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
Today's loss is a stab in the
back delivered to us by
accomplices of terrorists. I
cannot qualify what happened
today as anything else. Our
pilots and our plane in no way
threatened the Turkish republic.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later, Russia's
Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov
canceled a scheduled visit to
Turkey and said Russian citizens
should avoid travelling to the
country. But, in Ankara, Turkish
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan
said his country's actions were
justified. RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN,
Turkish President (through
translator): We are feeling
distressed, but the actions were
fully in line with Turkey's
rules for engagement that have
been declared before. Turkey
doesn't harbor enmity towards
its neighbors. JUDY WOODRUFF: In
Brussels, NATO convened an
emergency meeting at the request
of Turkey, a NATO member-state.
Secretary-General Jens
Stoltenberg said he supports
Turkey, but the facts must
emerge. JENS STOLTENBERG, NATO
Secretary-General: This is a
situation which calls on that we
all are prudent and that we call
contribute to de-escalating the
situation. JUDY WOODRUFF: At the
White House, President Obama
spoke after meeting with French
President Francois Hollande on
efforts to ramp up the U.S.-led
coalition's campaign against
Islamic State. He said Turkey
had a right to defend its
airspace. BARACK OBAMA,
President of the United States:
I do think that this points to a
ongoing problem with the Russian
operations, in the sense that
they are operating very close to
a Turkish border and they are
going after moderate opposition
that are supported not only
Turkey, but a wide range of
countries. JUDY WOODRUFF: The
president again said Russia
could work with the coalition if
it decides only to target the
Islamic State. But as it stands,
Mr. Obama said Russia had made a
more limited choice. BARACK
OBAMA: Russia right now is a
coalition of two, Iran and
Russia, supporting Assad. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, Hollande
said France would redouble its
efforts to fight ISIS, but he
said that effort will go only so
far. FRANCOIS HOLLANDE, French
President (through translator):
France will not intervene
militarily on the ground. It is
for the local forces to do so.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hollande will be
in Moscow Thursday to meet with
Putin. We will come back to look
at the consequences of the
shoot-down of the Russian plane
after the news summary. French
prosecutors announced today the
alleged mastermind of the Paris
attacks likely had plans for
another suicide bombing in the
city's business district.
Abdelhamid Abaaoud, who died in
a police raid last week, also
moved actively from crime scene
to crime scene in Paris just
hours after the carnage.
FRANCOIS MOLINS, Paris
Prosecutor (through translator):
The geolocation of the suspected
phone line of Abdelhamid Abaaoud
shows that he was present and
notably near the attacks sites
and, notably, near the Bataclan
concert hall. This makes us
think that he returned to the
crime scenes after the attacks
on the cafes and restaurants and
while the anti-terror brigade
was still working at the
Bataclan. JUDY WOODRUFF: Jawad
Bendaoud, the man who allegedly
housed the ringleader and at
least two others, was charged
today in connection with the
attacks. He claims he didn't
know that they were terrorists.
Meanwhile, in Brussels, Belgium,
a terror alert extended into a
fourth day. Soldiers patrolled
the streets and the subway
remained closed. Tunisia is
under a state of emergency
tonight after a terrorist attack
on a bus filled with
presidential guards killed at
least 12 people. The explosion
happened along a main avenue in
the capital city, Tunis. There
were reports that it was caused
by a bomber who detonated an
explosive device inside the bus.
Ten days ago, authorities
increased security levels and
deployed extra forces across the
capital. U.S. Secretary of State
John Kerry visited Israel and
the West Bank today as sporadic
violence flared in the area. A
Palestinian drove his vehicle
into a group of Israeli soldiers
at a checkpoint. Elsewhere,
Palestinians hurled stones at
Israeli troops in Ramallah, who
fired back with tear gas and
rubber bullets. Hours later,
Kerry was in that city to meet
with Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas. Earlier, he met
with Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu in Jerusalem.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: No people anywhere should
live with daily violence, with
attacks in the streets, with
knifes or scissors or cars. And
it is very clear to us that
terrorism, these acts of
terrorism which are taking
place, deserve the condemnation
that they are receiving. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Kerry made no mention
of reviving peace talks. This
has been the deadliest week
since the current wave of
violence broke out in
mid-September. Liberia has
recorded its first Ebola death
since July, a 15-year-old boy.
He died in an eastern district
of the West African country on
Monday night. Both his father
and brother have also been
diagnosed with Ebola. Health
workers have identified about
160 other people who might be at
risk because they came in direct
contact with the boy. Liberia's
Ebola outbreak began in March
2014 and killed more than 4,800
people. The American Civil
Liberties Union has filed a
lawsuit against the governor of
Indiana for suspending programs
that help resettle Syrian
refugees in his state.
Republican Mike Pence stopped
accepting Syrians in the wake of
the Paris attacks. The federal
lawsuit was filed on behalf of
the non-profit group Exodus
Refugee Immigration. In
Indianapolis, its executive
director argued it's illegal for
states to ban refugees based on
their nationality. CARLEEN
MILLER, Executive Director,
Exodus Refugee Immigration: I
really think it is completely
misguided, because refugees are
admitted into the U.S. They are
legal persons here, and they
have the freedom of movement,
just like anyone else. So they
can go to any state in the union
that they choose. JUDY WOODRUFF:
At the same time, the Canadian
government today unveiled a plan
to accept 25,000 Syrian refugees
by the end of February. The
country's new president, Justin
Trudeau, hasn't backed down from
the pledge he made before the
Paris attacks, and he promised
the screening process would be
vigorous. The state of Kentucky
has restored voting rights to
thousands of nonviolent felons
who have already served out
their sentences. Outgoing
Democratic Governor Steve
Beshear signed the executive
order today. He leaves office
next month. About 180,000 former
prisoners are affected. In
Florida, Virginia and Iowa,
felons and ex-felons still
permanently lose their right to
vote, without a pardon from the
governor. The U.S. economy did
better than expected over the
summer, expanding by more than 2
percent. The Commerce Department
revised its initial figures,
mainly because businesses
restocked their shelves faster
than estimated. Stocks on Wall
Street today gained ground on
rising crude oil prices. The Dow
Jones industrial average added
19 points to close at 17812. The
Nasdaq rose less than a point,
and the S&P 500 gained two
points. And late this afternoon
at the White House, President
Obama awarded the nation's
highest civilian award to 17 new
honorees. During a ceremony in
the East Room, the president
presented the Medal of Freedom
to this year's recipients, among
them, actress and singer Barbra
Streisand, movie director Steven
Spielberg, and NASA
mathematician Katherine Johnson.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
competing interests and a common
enemy forming a coalition
against ISIS; fatal shootings by
police spark protests in the
Midwest; the double-edged sword
of social media, a tool for
democracy and terrorism; and
much more. We return now to the
fight against the Islamic State
group and how those efforts
might be hindered by Turkey's
downing of a Russian warplane.
I'm joined by Nicholas Burns, a
career diplomat and former U.S.
ambassador to NATO. He's now a
professor at Harvard University.
And Angela Stent, author of "The
Limits of Partnership:
U.S.-Russian Relations in the
21st Century." She's a senior
fellow at the Transatlantic
Academy. And we welcome you
both. So, just based on what we
know, Angela Stent, who do we
think was at fault here? Was it
the Turks for allegedly
violating Russian airspace or
was it the Russians for -- I'm
sorry -- the Russians for going
into Turkish airspace, or the
other way around? ANGELA STENT,
Author, "The Limits of
Partnership": Well, apparently,
the Russians were only in
Turkish airspace for less than a
minute. But this isn't the first
time apparently that Russian
planes have violated Turkish
airspace. The Turks claim that
they gave the Russians 10
warnings. The Russians claim
that that's not true. But it
does appear that they were
briefly in Turkish airspace. The
question is, could this have
been de-escalated? Could the
Turks maybe have offered to
escort them out of Turkish
airspace? JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
Nicholas Burns, if they were in
Turkish -- over Turkish
airspace, even for less than
half-a-minute, was that
something that warranted being
shot down by the Turkish
military? NICHOLAS BURNS, Former
U.S. Undersecretary of State for
Political Affairs: Well, the
history and circumstances are
important here. They did violate
Turkish airspace. And, as
President Obama said, every
country has a right, Turkey has
a right to defend that airspace.
But the Russians have violated
Turkish airspace on several
occasions over the last two
months. Russian drones have gone
across the border. And the Turks
have warned the Russians both
publicly and privately. The
Russians have also been bombing
Syrian Turkmen, ethnic Turkmen
villages very close to that
border, and the Turks warned the
Russians about that. It seems to
be the last straw for the Turks.
There are some people who are
saying the Turks should have
acted differently, as Angela
said, that they might have
escorted the fighters out, but
there was fair warning to the
Russians. And as a NATO ally,
it's very important that the
United States defend this right
that every country's border are
sacrosanct. And what the
Russians did is clearly illegal
under international law. JUDY
WOODRUFF: So, Angela Stent, if
the Russians were repeatedly
invading Turkish airspace, even
for a brief time, the Turks then
thought ahead about what they
were doing. And what did they
accomplish by having done this?
ANGELA STENT: Well, I think the
Turks, they disagree with the
Russians on what they're doing
in Syria. The Turks of course
are taking all these refugees
from President Assad. The
Russians are supporting Assad.
And as Nick said, they have been
bombing and killing Turkmen
groups in Syria that are
protected really by Turkey. So I
think this is something that's
been brewing for some time. And
I think, on a broader point,
ever since the Russians began
the bombing campaign in Syria
and gave the U.S., for instance,
one hour's notice to get out of
the sky, there has been this
brinkmanship and there has been
the danger that something like
this would happen. And so I'm
sure that the Turks in some
senses were just waiting for
something like this to happen
and felt that they had to take a
stance on this. JUDY WOODRUFF:
Nicholas Burns, if that's the
case, if the Turks thought in
advance and in essence planned
to do this the next time a
Russian plane crossed their
border, what does that say about
what the Turks are -- what their
posture is at this point?
NICHOLAS BURNS: Well, I think
President Obama got the balance
right today. He clearly backed
the Turks on the legal issue of
protection of borders, but he
also said that he would spend
all of his time trying now to
de-escalate this conflict. And I
think what that means, Judy, is
that the United States is going
to be very active both in Moscow
and Ankara to counsel both to
stand down from any further
altercation. What really needs
to happen -- and Angela is
absolutely correct about this --
is, it's a crowded airspace in a
very small country. You have
American, French, sometimes
Arab, Russian aircraft and
Turkish aircraft patrolling in a
very small geographical area.
And so deconflicting those air
operations, having channels
among the militaries to let each
other know when they're going to
be conducting combat operations
is critical. The U.S. and Russia
have begun to do that under
Secretary Ash Carter's
leadership. The Turks and
Russians clearly have not. And I
think it's the role of the
United States to try to promote
that kind of transparency,
because we don't want to see a
further incident like. Very
dangerous. We haven't had
anything like this in nearly 60
years in the NATO relationship
with both the Soviet Union and
Russia. JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
before I ask you both about how
it gets calmed down, let me just
ask you the question the other
way, Angela Stent. Why are the
Russians repeatedly crossing the
border into Turkey? Do they not
see that as a provocative
offense? ANGELA STENT: Well, I
think the Russians, they are
stating that they're back in
Syria, that they want to be a
leader, if you like, in this
coalition and that the Turks
don't have the right to do this
to them. And they really want to
be -- they want the U.S. to come
to them and they want this broad
coalition. They want to be the
leader. And so they're really
being -- I mean, there is some
reckless behavior here,
obviously, even though they have
been deconflicting, as Nick
said, with the U.S. on a
bilateral basis, and, by the
way, the Israelis, too. But
they're rather selective in the
countries with which they have
so far being willing to
deconflict. JUDY WOODRUFF: What
does this say -- to both of you,
Nick, to you first. What does
this say about the efforts? And
you have just mentioned them
going along to try to put a
coalition together to find some
resolution in Syria. NICHOLAS
BURNS: Well, it's tragically
ironic that the two countries
that France and the United
States need to join this
coalition against the Islamic
State are Turkey and Russia.
Turkey, as you know, has been --
has bombed in the recent weeks
the Syrian Kurdish groups that
have been the most effective
fighting force against the
Islamic State. The Russians have
made a great rhetorical show of
saying they're against the
Islamic State, but 95 percent of
airstrikes are not against the
Islamic State, but against some
of the Syrian groups, the Sunni
and Turkmen groups opposing
President Assad. So, the
challenge here is to make the
coalition bigger and stronger,
to find a way to bring the
Russians and Turks in, but also,
Judy, to bring the Europeans in.
Most of the Europeans are
missing in action. Britain is
not involved in the air campaign
in Syria. And the Arab states
that made a big show of joining
this coalition several months
ago are mainly focused on Yemen,
not here. And so I think that's
the challenge for President
Obama and President Hollande as
they met at the White House this
morning. JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
Angela Stent, do you see any
prospects for putting this
coalition together, getting it
stronger, getting it broader,
when, as Nicholas has just said,
the Russians are going after the
anti-Assad rebels? They're not
primarily going after ISIS.
ANGELA STENT: I think it's going
to be very difficult. We
fundamentally -- we disagree
with the Russians on the fate of
President Assad, and then we
disagree who the enemy is. We
can agree that it's Islamic
State, but, as has been said,
the Russians have been bombing
mainly groups that are not part
of the Islamic State. I think
it's going to be extremely
difficult. And it would take a
resolution on Russia's part to
understand that they have to be
willing to make compromises on
the issue of, you know, which
groups you, in fact, are
targeting. And so far, we
haven't seen very much
willingness on their part to do
that. JUDY WOODRUFF: Nicholas
Burns, is -- do you sense,
though, that there are still
efforts to bring the Russians
around? I mean, I keep reading
reports that the administration
continues to work on that, but
we just haven't seen any sign of
it yet. NICHOLAS BURNS: Well, we
need to work with the Russians,
mainly because they need the
Russians at the negotiating
table in Vienna. And Secretary
Kerry, I think, clearly
understands there won't be any
progress on these negotiations
-- and these are going to be
tough, complex negotiations --
unless the Russians and Iran and
Hezbollah are there. That's
another problem for the
Russians. They have a mainly
Sunni Muslim population in their
own North Caucasus region, but
the Russians have aligned
themselves with the Shia powers,
with Iran, with Hezbollah, and
with the Alawite regime in
Syria. And I think if the
Russians don't restrain the
Syrian government from firing
barrel bombs into civilian
neighborhoods, the United States
ought to consider a no-flight
zone with Turkey and other
countries to shut down the
Syrian air force. That's what
Secretary -- former Secretary
Hillary Clinton has been
advocating. And I think she's
right that the way to save
civilian lives and reduce the
number of refugees is shut down
air traffic in the northern part
of Syrian. I think, Judy, that's
an idea that the administration
has to consider now, given these
events. JUDY WOODRUFF: And we
know a number of candidates in
fact are talking about that.
Well, the situation only got
more complicated today. Nicholas
Burns, Angela Stent, we thank
you. NICHOLAS BURNS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
threats to the world's most
prolific pollinator. But, first,
we take a look at the latest
wave of violence in Israel and
the Palestinian territories, and
how it connects to a new lawsuit
against social media giant
Facebook. Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret Warner.
MARGARET WARNER: Last month on
this Jerusalem bus, three
Israeli Jews were killed by two
young Palestinians wielding guns
and knives, among them,
76-year-old Richard Lakin. The
American-Israeli teacher, a
longtime U.S. civil rights
activist and educator, brought
his family to Israel in 1984.
His son Micah Avni recounts the
horror of his death. MICAH AVNI,
Son of Victim: One of the
terrorists, he shot my father in
the head. My father fell to the
ground. The other terrorist took
out a knife and started stabbing
him. He stabbed him multiple
times in the head, in the face,
slit his stomach wide open,
cutting most of his vital
organs. MARGARET WARNER: Richard
Lakin was among more than 70
targets of a new wave of attacks
this fall on Jewish individuals
by Palestinians. Since October
1, the Israeli Foreign Ministry
says, at least 21 Israelis have
been killed, and more than 184
wounded. What's different, the
vast majority of the attacks
were by stabbing. Also notable,
the assailants seem to be
getting younger, as young as 12
or 13. Since the uptick in
violence began, at least 86
Palestinians have been killed as
well, shot during or after
carrying out an attack, or in
clashes with Israeli forces.
After Lakin was stabbed, his son
struggled to understand. MICAH
AVNI: I asked myself, what would
bring two 20-, 22-year-olds to
board a bus and do something so
brutal as to shoot three
70-year-olds and then to take a
knife and start to cut them up?
MARGARET WARNER: Then, online,
he discovered hundreds of
Facebook, Twitter and YouTube
postings encouraging
Palestinians to stab Israeli
Jews, and instructing them how
to do it. MICAH AVNI: Here's the
instructional video showing how
to most effectively slice
somebody open with a knife in a
way that my father was sliced
open. They have a terrorist
encouraging people to go out and
stab Jews and showing how to
best prepare a knife and sharpen
it. MARGARET WARNER: Avni
believes such postings spurred
the attacks on his father and
others. He's now the lead
plaintiff in a New York
class-action lawsuit against
Facebook. It was filed by the
Tel Aviv-based Israel Law
Center, which takes legal action
on behalf of terror victims and
against what it calls Israel's
enemies; 20,000 Israelis have
joined the suit. First, it asks
the court to order Facebook to
stop allowing Palestinian
terrorists to incite violent
attacks against Israeli
citizens. It also charges that
Facebook's computers use
algorithms to connect terrorists
to users who've expressed
interest in violent acts against
Jews. NOURA ERAKAT, George Mason
University: It's not Facebook
and YouTube and Twitter that is
inspiring youth to take up
knives against civilians. The
root cause of this is the
ongoing occupation and the
violence, the military violence
that's meted out against
Palestinian bodies every day.
MARGARET WARNER: Noura Erakat is
assistant professor at George
Mason University outside
Washington. Are you saying you
think these videos are
insignificant? NOURA ERAKAT: I
think that they are
insignificant relative to what
Palestinians are actually
producing. MARGARET WARNER: And,
she adds, there are plenty of
hateful postings from the
Israeli side too. NOURA ERAKAT:
Facebook was also the site of a
page in the summer of 2014, that
the page was, Israel demands
revenge. Within less than a day,
there were 37,000 likes on that
page. MARGARET WARNER: Facebook
declined to grant us an
on-camera interview, sending a
statement that said in part:
"There is no place for content
encouraging violence, direct
threats, terrorism or hate
speech on Facebook. We urge
people to use our reporting
tools if they find content that
they believe violates our
standards, so we can investigate
and take swift action." The
lawsuit, however, wants the
court to order Facebook to
remove content on its own. Noura
Erakat fears more vigorous
policing by Facebook will be
unfairly applied. NOURA ERAKAT:
What we can be assured is that
Facebook will take a much more
stringent approach to
Palestinian speech in ways that
they won't also apply to Israeli
speech. So we will see the
chilling of speech amongst
Palestinians. MARGARET WARNER:
That prospect concerns First
Amendment lawyer and national
security expert Jonathan Turley
of George Washington University.
JONATHAN TURLEY, Constitutional
Attorney, George Washington
University: Unfortunately, this
is part of a trend that we have
been watching occur in Europe
largely, particularly France and
England, where free speech is
being eroded. It's being eroded
with the criminalization of
speech that may be insulting or
viewed as threatening to any
group or individual. At the same
time, we have seen civil
litigation like this case where
people are going to the courts
to try to get injunctions. It's
an effort to use the court to
punish or chill speech. MARGARET
WARNER: Turley is just as
critical of efforts to shut down
Facebook's algorithms connecting
violence-minded Palestinians
with one another. JONATHAN
TURLEY: It's not just free
speech that people want to
limit. Once you limit free
speech, they seek to limit free
association. There's no question
that -- that companies like
Facebook allow for dangerous
associations to be made. The
question is, are we comfortable
with having the government or a
court sit there and choose what
are beneficial associations and
what are not? MARGARET WARNER:
Most radical groups use social
media for recruitment and
propaganda. So says J.M. Berger,
author of a book on ISIS and a
scholar at the Brookings
Institution. J.M. BERGER,
Brookings Institution: What
we're seeing is, there's a
growing trend toward them using
it. WOLF BLITZER, CNN: Federal
authorities arrested an Ohio man
today, accusing him of spreading
ISIS propaganda. MARGARET
WARNER: In the U.S., general
incitement has rarely been
prosecuted. But, lately, some
people are being charged, he
says. J.M. BERGER: Well, the
question of incitement to
violence is a pretty complicated
one. We had a recent case, an
arrest of an ISIS supporter who
had posted names and addresses
of U.S. military personnel with
an injunction to go kill those
people. And that person was
charged with incitement to
violence, which we had not seen
previously as a counterterrorism
charge. MARGARET WARNER: Global
social media companies must walk
a balancing act between
protected speech and illegal
content. J.M. BERGER: Companies
have to tailor their response to
each country's rules and
regulations. Turkey and Russia
have been the source of a very
large number of take-down
requests to remove content,
based on claims that the content
is terrorist. But their
definitions of terrorism are not
necessarily the same as ours.
MARGARET WARNER: Turley believes
the Paris attacks prove Europe's
cracking down on violent content
has been ineffective. JONATHAN
TURLEY: If you look at Germany,
which has the longest experience
on this in prohibiting even
symbols like the swastika or
people who deny the Holocaust,
it hasn't made a bit of
difference. The neo-Nazi
movement has continued to grow.
By forcing these groups
underground, you lose track, not
only of them, but their views
and how they're changing. Much
of our actionable intelligence
comes from being on these sites.
MARGARET WARNER: So your view
is, on the Internet, just let
1,000 poisonous flowers bloom,
whatever the effect? JONATHAN
TURLEY: No. You know, these
companies have the right to pull
material. There's a big
difference between asking a
government entity like a court
to censor or strip speech.
MARGARET WARNER: In the U.S.,
policing of sites generally
falls to the companies
themselves, says Brookings'
Berger: J.M. BERGER: These
companies suspend thousands of
users every day for a variety of
reasons, for instance, child
pornography, other kinds of
content and harassment. And what
we don't have is any kind of
disclosure of who they suspend
and why. MARGARET WARNER: One
thing that can prompt them to
act, he says, is negative
publicity. J.M. BERGER: The
companies are extremely
sensitive to bad press. Those
stories will eventually have an
effect, even on companies that
claim to have a very high-minded
mandate about free speech.
MARGARET WARNER: Facebook's
response is expected in the New
York State Supreme Court in
January. For Micah Anvi and his
lawyers, even if their lawsuit
fails, a publicity-driven change
in Facebook policing policies
would be a victory. I'm Margaret
Warner for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now back to the
news out of Chicago. Within the
past hour, the mayor and chief
of police held a press
conference about the police
officer's killing of a
17-year-old last year. RAHM
EMANUEL (D), Mayor of Chicago:
We need, as a city, to get to a
point where young men in our
community and in parts of our
city see an officer and don't
just see an officer with a
uniform and a badge, but they
see him as a partner in helping
them reach their full potential,
and they see in that officer a
mentor, a little league coach, a
leader in their church and in
their community, which they are.
But we also have to get to a
place in the city where officers
who patrol communities in our
city see a young man not as a
potential problem and a risk,
but they also are seeing that
young man as an individual who
is worthy of their protection
and their potential. JUDY
WOODRUFF: This has been one
incident in a number of
shootings recently of
African-American men by police
officers that have sparked
outrage. Protests in Minneapolis
continued today over the
shooting death of Jamar Clark
there nine days ago. Today, two
people were arrested after five
people were shot last night in
protests there. Jeffrey Brown
has more on both of these
stories. JEFFREY BROWN: Chicago
police officer Jason Van Dyke is
being held without bail after he
was charged Tuesday morning with
the first-degree murder of
Laquan McDonald. The 17-year-old
black teenager was shot sixteen
times in October 2014, after Van
Dyke, who is white, confronted
the teen for allegedly
puncturing a police cruiser's
tire. Cook County state's
attorney Anita Alvarez discussed
the charge this afternoon. ANITA
ALVAREZ, Cook County State's
Attorney: It is my determination
that this defendant's actions,
of shooting Laquan McDonald when
he didn't pose an immediate
threat of great bodily harm or
death, and his subsequent
actions of shooting Laquan
McDonald while he lay on the
ground after previously being
struck by gunfire, were not
justified, and they were not a
proper use of deadly force by
this police officer. JEFFREY
BROWN: Yesterday, Chicago Mayor
Rahm Emanuel condemned the
shooting. RAHM EMANUEL: This
officer didn't uphold the law.
He took the law into this own
hand. Didn't build the trust
that we want to see and wasn't
about providing the safety and
security. So, at every point, he
violated what we entrust him.
JEFFREY BROWN: But after today's
indictment, Van Dyke's attorney
responded forcefully. DANIEL
HERBERT, Attorney for Jason Van
Dyke: This is a case that can't
be tried in the streets, it
can't be tried in the media, it
can't be tried on Facebook. With
respect to certain comments that
have been made by politicians,
politicians who have not seen
the video, where I believe my
client's conduct has been
described as hideous, I would
state that those comments --
they are irresponsible, and
they're certainly unfair and
prejudicial to my client.
Thankfully, politicians will not
be deciding the fate of my
client in this case. JEFFREY
BROWN: The city was under a
court order to release, by
tomorrow, the video recorded by
Van Dyke's police cruiser
dashboard camera. Mayor Emanuel,
who has resisted publicizing the
video for months, met with
pastors and other community
leaders Monday to prepare them
for what could be an intense
reaction to its release. Late
this afternoon, after word came
out that the video would be
released, I spoke to Reverend
Jedidiah Brown, head of Young
Leaders Alliance, and asked him
what he expected to happen. REV.
JEDIDIAH BROWN, Young Leaders
Alliance: We can't predict the
reaction, because even listening
to the reading of, it was
painful. I can't imagine the
pain that will be felt when they
see the video. There is a lot of
anger, but the video is a
vehicle that is unearthing a lot
of the discontent that citizens
on the South and the West Side
of Chicago have had from police
brutality, the lack of
representation, lack of
investment. JEFFREY BROWN:
Meanwhile, in Minneapolis, late
last night, five protesters
outside a police precinct were
shot by three unidentified
attackers. PROTESTERS: We want
justice! We want justice!
JEFFREY BROWN: The protesters
had been demonstrating outside
the precinct since the fatal
shooting of a young black man by
a police officer more than a
week ago. Some witnesses claimed
24-year-old Jamar Clark was
either handcuffed or restrained
at the time of the shooting. But
the police union representing
the officers involved denied
that allegation and said Clark
had gained control of an
officer's gun. Today, police
arrested two male suspects, one
white, one Hispanic. And the
brother of Jamar Clark has
called for an end to the
demonstration in light of the
shootings. But members of the
Black Lives Matter movement, who
have been credited with keeping
the Minneapolis demonstrations
peaceful, say they will continue
to protest. MISKI NOOR, Black
Lives Matter: We will not bow to
fear or intimidation. Black
Lives Matter exists to fight
against this type of violent
white supremacy, dangerous
anti-black rhetoric, and
criminalization of black people.
Because of that, we are
recommitting our occupation of
the Fourth Precinct until we get
justice. JEFFREY BROWN: Police
say there were no
life-threatening injuries among
the five people shot Monday
night. However, one victim
underwent surgery for a gunshot
wound to the stomach. And
joining us now for more
perspective on both of these
cases is Georgetown University
Law Center Professor Paul
Butler. He is also a former
federal prosecutor. Welcome to
you. Clearly, things moved
quickly after the order to
release the video, right? Did
that surprise you? PAUL BUTLER,
Professor, George Washington
University School of Law: It
did, in the sense that this
shooting happened a year ago. If
the evidence is that compelling
to sustain murder charges, you
have to wonder why it took the
prosecutor so long to bring the
charges and why until today
officer Van Dyke was a working
Chicago police officer. JEFFREY
BROWN: So, what does that tell
you? What role did the video
play, then? PAUL BUTLER: You
know, it doesn't denigrate the
prosecutor to say that, in this
case, politics played a role, as
in every high-profile decision
by a prosecutor. This is an area
in which the politics over the
last year has changed. So, this
is a prosecutor who is involved
in a tough reelection battle. In
this day and age, in some cities
with big minority populations
like Chicago, it's advantageous
to a prosecutor to say that she
goes after cops when they cross
the line. JEFFREY BROWN: Now, a
murder charge, first-degree
murder is very unusual,
extremely unusual, I understand,
in the case of Chicago with the
police force. What does that say
to you about the case that the
prosecutors think they have?
PAUL BUTLER: You know, Jeffrey,
a Chicago police officer hasn't
been charged with murder in 50
years at least. So, again, the
prosecutor seems to think she's
got compelling evidence. It's
hard to get jurors to convict
officers. Even when they think
that they made a mistake, jurors
are usually forgiving, because
they think they're just trying
to do their job. So, normally,
what happens in any criminal
prosecution is that the
defendant pleads guilty to a
lesser charge. So, maybe the
prosecutor is kind of throwing
the book at this defendant, in
order to get him to plead
guilty. Usually, in these cases,
when officers are charged -- and
that's rare, even when they kill
in the line of duty -- but when
they are charged, we usually see
manslaughter or negligent
homicide. JEFFREY BROWN: So you
think they might be leaving some
room here for a lesser charge,
possibly? PAUL BUTLER: I would
have to say, frankly, I wouldn't
want to take this case to trial.
What's sensational apparently
about the video is the number of
shots, 16. But we believe that's
not all that probative. If an
officer reasonably believes that
his life is in danger, he's
entitled to use deadly force,
that is, to do whatever it takes
to kill the assailant. I think
what's more probative is the
fact that none of the other six
officers on the scene fired at
all, and that officer Van Dyke
fired within 15, 30 seconds of
arriving at the scene. JEFFREY
BROWN: Now, come back to what
you were talking about earlier,
the larger context in both
Chicago, Minneapolis, other
cities, but especially Chicago
here, the mistrust, historic
mistrust between the
African-American community and
the police force and officials.
PAUL BUTLER: You know, Jeffrey,
I am from Chicago. And I have to
say, growing up, the police were
kind of notorious in my South
Side community for not treating
African-Americans fairly. The
city has paid over $500 million
just in the last 10 years to
settle police brutality cases.
Now, hopefully, this is the
moment that, regardless of what
happens in the criminal
prosecution, the city will use
this as an opportunity to
assess. Clearly, the victim in
this case was having some kind
of mental health crisis. So the
police need to be better trained
how to address those situations.
This also clearly makes the case
for dashboards, for body cams
for police officers. We have to
wonder, if there wasn't this
video of this case, whether
there would be this sustained
attention to this issue in
Chicago. JEFFREY BROWN: You
heard probably in our setup
piece just now my talk with
Reverend Jedidiah Brown, talking
about that -- those very issues,
what he hoped might come out of
it, even though no one quite
knows what happens next. In the
press conference, we also heard
the mayor, Rahm Emanuel, calling
for a kind of moment, a testing
moment for all of Chicago. PAUL
BUTLER: Yes. So, you know, the
reason that these issues are
getting a lot of attention is
because of this extraordinary
activism that's come under the
rubric of the Black Lives Matter
social movement. So they're
savvy. They're strategic. And
they understand, I think, that
if there is a violent response
to this video, that that's not
going to be in the best interest
of this important social
movement. So we haven't really
seen a lot of violence,
especially, again, when these
protests have been organized by
Black Lives Matters. So, again,
I think the citizens of Chicago
will respond responsibly,
especially because, in this
case, the prosecutor is being
proactive. JEFFREY BROWN: And
just very briefly, you do see a
-- from a legal standpoint, you
see a progression in these cases
in how quickly they have been
brought and how -- the stronger
cases being brought? PAUL
BUTLER: Yes. Again, it's
important not to underestimate
the impact of all this activism.
It's changing the politics, so
that now police officers are in
some ways being treated like
other suspects when they're
being investigated for crimes.
If there is evidence that
they're guilty, then now they're
being prosecuted, not all the
time, not even most of the time,
but some of the time. And from
the perspective of activists,
that's progress. JEFFREY BROWN:
Paul Butler of the Georgetown
Law Center, thank you very much.
PAUL BUTLER: It's great to be
here. JUDY WOODRUFF: In this
week when we think about food,
we take a look now at the vital
role bees play in getting some
of your favorite dishes to the
table, and the way commercial
beekeepers in the U.S. are
struggling to keep their bees
healthy. Allison Aubrey of
National Public Radio has our
report. The story is part of the
"NewsHour"'s ongoing
collaboration with NPR. ALLISON
AUBREY: It's harvest time at
Adee Honey Farms in Bruce, South
Dakota. Bret Adee's the third
generation to manage the 80,000
hives the Adees have scattered
across five Midwestern states.
He says beekeeping these days is
much harder than it's ever been.
BRET ADEE, Adee Honey Farms: In
2010, our bees were just
destroyed in a couple of weeks.
Most of our bees died. ALLISON
AUBREY: Bret says things really
haven't improved much. BRET
ADEE: I would to see about twice
to three times as many bees in
most of the hives right now. It
will be a real challenge to keep
them alive through the winter.
ALLISON AUBREY: The Adees are
not alone. According to a
preliminary survey from the U.S.
Department of Agriculture,
commercial beekeepers lost 42
percent of their colonies last
year. Bees are a critical part
of agriculture. Adee trucks his
bees out to pollinate
California's almond groves every
year. And it's not just almonds.
Bees pollinate everything from
apples to cherries and squash.
To figure out what's plaguing
the bees, the Obama
administration assembled a task
force last year. Scientists at
the EPA, USDA and researchers
across the country who have been
studying the problem are finding
there are multiple issues. Bees
have fewer wildflowers to forage
on due to a loss of habitat.
There's viruses that pests pass
on to the bees. Climate change
is thought to play a role too.
Another issue is pesticides.
Some studies suggest that a
class of pesticides known as
neonicotinoid, or neonics for
short, are harming the bees.
These pesticides are coated onto
the seed of about 80 percent of
the corn that's grown in the
United States and about half the
soybeans too. To get a sense of
that scale, imagine a cornfield
like this taking up the entire
state of California. That's how
much of this pre-treated seed is
being planted. CHRISTIAN KRUPKE,
Purdue University: This is what
corn seeds look like after they
have been treated. ALLISON
AUBREY: The pesticide is put
onto the corn before it's ever
planted? CHRISTIAN KRUPKE:
That's right. ALLISON AUBREY:
Christian Krupke is an
entomologist at Purdue
University who studies bees. His
research shows that
neonicotinoids can harm bees.
What is a neonicotinoid?
CHRISTIAN KRUPKE: A
neonicotinoid is -- as the name
would suggest, it's based on
nicotine. They're less toxic to
mammals, which is a big feature
in their wide adoption. But they
are more toxic to honey bees and
to other insects. ALLISON
AUBREY: Neonics are a relatively
new class of pesticide. They
have been around since the early
1990s. They are easier for
farmers to use than the
traditional method of spraying
crops. And according to
researchers at Penn State
University, their use has
increased more than 11-fold
since 2003. Companies that sell
them are making billions of
dollars. CHRISTIAN KRUPKE:
Virtually all of these large
acre plants are being treated.
So, the level of use is way out
of step with the level of the
threat. In most fields, and
where we have worked, we just
haven't been able to find levels
of pests that would justify the
level of use. ALLISON AUBREY:
Krupke published a study that
linked bee deaths with the
pesticide-laden dust that flies
up during the planting of the
pre-treated corn seeds.
CHRISTIAN KRUPKE: We collected
some of those bees and analyzed
them and found neonicotinoids on
them and in them, so there is an
intersection between planting
these crops and killing foraging
honey bees. ALLISON AUBREY:
Bayer CropScience is one of the
leading manufacturers of
neonicotinoids. Bayer's chief
scientist, David Fischer,
acknowledges Krupke's findings,
but he says Bayer has a seed
lubricant that reduces the dust.
He says that, outside these
acute exposures, neonicotinoids
are not harmful to bees. DAVID
FISCHER, Bayer CropScience: We
have done those studies. And
those studies basically show, if
you spray the product, it's not
safe for the bees. If you apply
the product to the soil or as a
seed treatment, the level of
residues that gets up into the
plant is in a safe range.
ALLISON AUBREY: Christian Krupke
is not convinced. CHRISTIAN
KRUPKE: We find these pesticides
in the water. Bees drink water.
Plants use water. We find that
wildflowers that grow near these
areas also have some of these
pesticides in them. You add that
up over the course of a season,
and, yes, we do find concerning
levels. ALLISON AUBREY: Krupke
says those levels do not kill
the bees, but may leave them
more vulnerable. Bayer's chief
scientist says the major threat
to bees is a mite that punctures
the honey bees body and feeds on
its blood. It's known as the
Varroa mite. And a recent report
issued by President Obama's task
force also points to the mite as
one issue. DAVID FISCHER: Eighty
percent of the problem is Varroa
mites and the viruses and the
diseases those viruses cause.
ALLISON AUBREY: But some
beekeepers suspect the increased
use of the newer pesticides is
making their bees more
vulnerable to the mite. BRET
ADEE: For 15 years, we managed
that Varroa mite and kept our
losses under 5 to 8 percent. Now
we're losing 50 percent of the
bees every year. ALLISON AUBREY:
Pesticide manufacturers,
including Bayer and Syngenta
have launched campaigns of their
own to boost bee health. Both
companies are planting millions
of flowers in the U.S. to
increase bee forage. And in
2014, Bayer CropScience opened
this $2 million bee care center
in North Carolina, where they
conduct workshops and tours.
Environmentalists say these
initiatives are a diversion from
the real problem, the pesticides
these companies manufacture,
something Fischer rejects. DAVID
FISCHER: Bayer has actually been
in the business of providing
products to beekeepers for more
than 20 years. It's not
something that we just started
doing. ALLISON AUBREY:
Beekeepers in Europe came out in
force a few years ago in support
of the European Union's partial
ban on the use of some of these
neonics. And here in the U.S.,
the Environmental Protection
Agency says it will speed up a
safety review and likely not
allow any new uses of the
pesticide. Environmental groups
are locked in several court
battles challenging the EPA over
the registration of these
pesticides. Manufacturers
maintain that neonics are vital
for increasing crop production
and safer than spraying. DAVID
FISCHER: They're extremely
valuable. They increase crop
yields often by 20 percent vs.
the other competitors. So, they
contribute billions of dollars
to the ag economy in the United
States. CHRISTIAN KRUPKE: That
would be true if these products,
these neonicotinoids, were
indispensable to these crops, to
agriculture, but they're not.
Some of our own work in corn and
the work of others in the United
States has shown that it's very
difficult to consistently show a
yield benefit. ALLISON AUBREY:
Lucas Criswell farms close to
2,000 acres of corn, soybeans,
wheat and rye in Pennsylvania's
Susquehanna Valley. He has
stopped using treated seed
because he found it wasn't only
killing the bad pests, but the
pests he needed to ward off the
slugs that were eating his
soybean crops. LUCAS CRISWELL,
Farmer: The soil in our fields
are a huge ecology of different
critters and insects. And
they're all there. We need good
and bad. It takes a balance of
them all, and that's what we
have seen. ALLISON AUBREY:
Criswell now keeps pests at bay
in his fields by planting crops
that encourage beneficial
insects. The treated seeds cost
more, so this method ends up
being cheaper for him. Is it too
soon enough to say whether
you're getting the same yields?
LUCAS CRISWELL: Is there corn
growing on that hill? It grew.
ALLISON AUBREY: It looks like a
lot of corn. Earlier this year,
President Obama's task force
called for a reevaluation of the
pesticides. And, consistent with
the president's requirements,
the EPA has expedited its
review. I'm Allison Aubrey of
NPR News for the "PBS NewsHour"
in Bruce, South Dakota. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Tonight, on most of
these PBS stations, "American
Experience" presents "The
Pilgrims," a documentary that
explores the religious
motivations of America's
earliest settlers. In this
excerpt, we learn about the
first Thanksgiving, a harvest
made possible by the generosity
of the native Tisquantum tribe
who joined the celebration.
LINDA COOMBS, Aquinnah Cultural
Center: They stayed for three
days. They went out and got five
deer to add to what the English
were cooking. They played games
together. There's like four
little facts of what happened,
and then the rest of it is fluff
that's been added over the
centuries. NARRATOR:
Two-and-a-half centuries later,
at another American moment of
great trial and suffering, the
humble event, all but
disregarded by the Pilgrims
themselves, would be recast as
one of the most important and
defining moments in American
history. We love the story of
Thanksgiving, because it's about
alliance and abundance, and
envisioning a future where
Native Americans and colonial
Americans can come together and
celebrate the providence of a
single God. KATHLEEN DONEGAN,
University of California,
Berkeley: But part of the reason
that they were grateful was that
they had been in such misery,
that they had lost so many
people on both sides. So, in
some way, that day of
Thanksgiving is also coming out
of mourning. It's also coming
out of grief, and this abundance
that is a relief from that loss.
But we don't think about the
loss. We think about the
abundance. JUDY WOODRUFF: You
can learn more about the
Pilgrims and the first
Thanksgiving tonight on
"American Experience," and on
our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tomorrow on the "NewsHour,"
we bring you a special
conversation Gwen recently had
with Aretha Franklin, the queen
of soul. GWEN IFILL: Will you
ever... (CROSSTALK) ARETHA
FRANKLIN, Musician: No, I'm not
ever going to retire. That's --
that wouldn't be good, for one,
just to go somewhere and sit
down and do nothing. Please. No,
that's not moi. JUDY WOODRUFF:
The full interview tomorrow on
the "NewsHour." On the
"NewsHour" online: Millions of
Americans will travel by air
this week to spend Thanksgiving
with loved ones, but those
flights come with a consequence:
air pollution. A new study
published in the journal "Nature
Climate Change" outlines 14 ways
passenger jets can cut carbon
emissions, at little cost. We
have the list on our home page.
And imagine a ham on your
Thanksgiving table in place of
the traditional turkey. It's a
scenario that got economists
talking, as turkey prices rise
and pork prices fall. Read
what's behind the shift on our
Making Sense page. All that and
more is at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tonight on "Charlie Rose":
former acting CIA Director Mike
Morell on why the government's
new travel warning needs to be
taken seriously. And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight. I'm Judy
Woodruff. Join us online and
again right here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour," thank you, and
good night.